v10 vs v11/berkeley documentation (#2227)
microbiomedata/nmdc-schema: src/docs/v10-vs-v11-retrospective.md

# Merging the Berkeley schema into the NMDC schema

This document is a retrospective on the changes made to the NMDC schema between major versions 10 and 11. The

> development of version 11 was launched during a meeting at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in December 2023,

Reviewer: I don't think we need lines 4-7.

and the development took place in a fork of the nmdc-schema called berkeley-schema-fy24. This is the first time a major

> update had comprehensive planning and development in a fork. A subsequent update in the same style has not planned yet

Reviewer 2: This typo is still here.

but is not ruled out.

Motivations for the Berkeley schema development included:

> - First class representations of "omics" methods beyond nucleic acid analysis, like mass-spectrometry based

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- First class representations of "omics" methods beyond nucleic acid analysis, like mass spectrometry-based
```

I'm used to hyphenating "based" with the word that precedes it, when the combination is being used as an adjective describing the noun that follows "based." I don't know the name of the grammatical rules that apply here.

Here's a related Q/A on StackExchange:

https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/207273/use-of-a-hyphen-with-the-word-based

  proteomics and metabolomics. Within the Berkeley schema development team, this effort has gone by names like
  "replacing `OmicsProcessing` with `DataGeneration`".
- Renaming and refactoring of the processes that model the processing of data, i.e. bioinformatics workflows.
- A continuation of bipartite (material->process->material->process) modeling for the processing of samples, following
  the bipartite modeling used in the bioinformatics workflows (data->process->data).
- Continuation of using example data files as unit tests of the schema
- Switching numerous string-range slots to enumeration-range slots.
- A requirement that all data records assert their own type and the addition of support for polymorphic aggregations of
  data
- Establishing schema development and modeling best practices and sharing domain understanding between subteams

See also: https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/releases/tag/v11.0.0

## Conventions:

> - `this back-ticked font` is used to indicate the verbatim names of elements from the schema and variables, functions,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `this monospaced font` is used to indicate the verbatim names of elements from the schema and variables, functions,
```

I don't think the backticks will be visible in rendered views of the document. I recommend describing it differently (e.g. "monospaced", "stylized").

Reviewer 2: The adjective "back-ticked" appears elsewhere in this document.

  etc. in code
- Things that appear in the back-ticked font and use `UpperCamelCase` are schema classes unless otherwise noted.
- Things that appear in the back-ticked font and use `lower_snake_case` are schema slots unless otherwise noted.
- Other LinkML schema [naming conventions](https://linkml.io/linkml/schemas/linter.html#standard-naming) are not
  discussed here.

> - A dotted notation in the back-ticked font, with elements in UpperCamelCase, like `Vehichle.MotorVehicle.PassengerCar`

Reviewer 2: This typo is still here.

  indicates a class hierarchy. `PassengerCar is_a MotorVehicle` and `MotorVehicle is_a Vehicle`.

## Refactoring of Classes

This major refactoring increases the number of **classes** in the schema from 70 to 75, but decreases the number of root
classes from 19 to 17 due to better organization.

_You won't find any classes designated as root classes in the schema,
but they can be inferred by the absence of any `is_a` assertions on the class. Root classes do not inherit anything
from any superclass. A routine part of schema maintenance is looking for opportunities to group and generalize similar
root classes._

### Table of classes removed, added or refactored in v10 to v11 migration

> | Removed legacy class                  | New/Replacement class from Berkeley schema | Selected legacy parents     |

Reviewer: I don't know what the "selected legacy parents" are trying to convey here?

Reviewer 3: I also am not sure why "selected legacy parents" is the chosen words.. can it just be "legacy parent"?

Author: It's "selected" because I didn't fill in all parents for all rows

Reviewer 3: ooooo ok. IDK how else to convey that so people like me aren't confused.. so probably fine

Author: I guess it deserves a brief explanation in the text

Author: https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/pull/2227/commits/08d5cada228a4967342a85070125cb0ff7971961

`MaterialProcessing` because it does not intrinsically create new/modified samples.

Terms that implied quantification like `MetaboliteQuantification` have been renamed to reemphasize the more fundamental
activity of identifying, thus `MetaboliteIdentification`

A `CalibrationInformation` class, a `Configuration` class and two `Configuration` subclasses (illustrated below) have
been added in support of chromatographic separations and mass spectrometry analyses. These are subclasses of the
new `InformationObject`, which has also become the parent of `DataObject`, which used to be a direct subclass
of `NamedThing`.

### v11.0.1

![InformationObject.png](../images/InformationObject.png)

### v11.0.1

![Configuration.png](../images/Configuration.png)

Solution-centric modelling for laboratory processes was also replaced with substance-centric modelling

### Removed:

- `Solution`
- `SolutionComponent`

### Added:

- `PortionOfSubstance`
- `MobilePhaseSegment`

### v11.0.1

![PortionOfSubstance.png](../images/PortionOfSubstance.png)

### v11.0.1

![MobilePhaseSegment.png](../images/MobilePhaseSegment.png)

> The Berkeley schema retains the `AttributeValue` hierarchy but eliminates classes like `IntegerValue`, and `UrlValue`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Berkeley schema retains the `AttributeValue` hierarchy but eliminates classes like `IntegerValue` and `UrlValue`,
```

> whose only advantages over a values of integer or string types were never-used provenance slots.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
whose only advantages over values of integer or string types were never-used provenance slots.
```

### v10.9.0

![AttributeValue10.png](../images/AttributeValue10.png)

### v11.0.1

![AttributeValue11.png](../images/AttributeValue11.png)

Classes related to metabolic reactions that a cell could carry out, based on some functionality in its genome, have been

> removed, due to potential confusion with reactions that an experimenter might carry out in order to amke a sample

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
removed, due to potential confusion with reactions that an experimenter might carry out in order to make a sample
```

Fix typo

suitable for analysis.

### Removed:

- `Reaction`
- `ReactionParticipant`

### Added

- `ChemicalConversionProcess`

> A very general `Instrument` class was added as a subclass of `MaterialEntity` , but without any subclasses. Knowledge

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A very general `Instrument` class was added as a subclass of `MaterialEntity`, but without any subclasses. Knowledge
```

Remove extra space

> about instruments is captured directly in NMDC's MongoDB. The instances are normalized by populating their `vendor` slot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
about instruments is captured directly in NMDC's MongoDB database. The instances are normalized by populating their `vendor` slot
```

Reviewer 3: Always thought the DB in MongoDB meant database... if it doesn't then 🤯
If it does, then @eecavanna  suggestion is redundant

Reviewer 2: I, too, assume the "DB" in MongoDB does stand for database; but there are "MongoDB" things that are not databases. There are MongoDB clients (e.g. Mongoose, Studio 3T, mongosh) and the MongoDB server software, for example. To disambiguate from those things, I recommend the article say "the MongoDB database" (or, colloquially, "the Mongo database"), but not "the MongoDB". The latter may lead people to wonder "the MongoDB _what_?"

Author: either is fine with me

Reviewer 3: thanks @eecavanna ! I agree with this change then

with a value from the `InstrumentVendorEnum` and by populating the `model` slot with a value from the
`InstrumentModelEnum`. Mappings between these NMDC vocabularies and vocabularies from collaborators like NCBI and GOLD
are saved in various repos like nmdc-schema and nmdc-runtime.

`AnalyticalSample` was removed from the `MaterialEntity` hierarchy, as NMDC does not wish to imply that certain samples
could be used for analyses or that other could not be used for analyses, or even that some samples a locked into an
analytical path, such that they could not be subject to any more `MaterialProcessing`.

## Refactoring of Slots

The number of **slots** in the schema remains 872 after the Berkeley merger, although there are 44 slots that have been
retired from the legacy schema and 44 that were added in the switch from v10 to v11.

Many of the slot changes can be understood by looking at the Python data migration code in `nmdc_schema/migrators`

A major explanation for the slot differences is the adoption of a _polymorphic_  (ie multi-shaped) _model_  for slots in

> the `Database` class, which corresponds to polymorphic collections in the v11-compliant MongoDB. In the legacy model,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `Database` class, which corresponds to polymorphic collections in the v11-compliant MongoDB database. In the legacy model,
```

Author: @eecavanna @mslarae13 I'm happy with either version. Would the two of you please make a decision?

Reviewer 3: @eecavanna 's point makes sense to me now. So let's add the database qualifier :)

Author: https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/pull/2227/commits/3d7d2c46739b878443639c6d69ea6404496af619

the range for each of the `Database` slots was intended to be one class, with no provision for class hierarchy. In the

> new model, the range for each slot is still specified as a single class, but the slots can collect instances of that
> named class, plus the instances of any subclass of the class in the slots' range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
new model, the range for each slot is still specified as a single class, but the slot can now collect instances of that
named class, plus instances of any subclass of that named class.
```

I focused on a single slot (since the description is being applied to "each" slot).

Author: I made your edit in PyCharm

* `omics_processing_set`
* `planned_process_set`
* `pooling_set`
* `read_based_taxonomy_analysis_activity_set`
* `read_qc_analysis_activity_set`

### Slots added to `Database`

* `calibration_set`
* `chemical_entity_set`
* `chromatographic_category`
* `configuration_set`
* `data_generation_set`
* `instrument_set`
* `material_processing_set`
* `protocol_execution_set`
* `storage_process_set`
* `workflow_execution_set`

So now, instances of `MetaproteomicsAnalysis`, `MetatranscriptomeAnnotation` and `NomAnalysis` are all collected (or
aggregated) in `workflow_execution_set`.

These polymorphic collection are enabled by a significant modeling change in v11 of the schema: a strict requirement
that, within any representation of schema-compliant data, that all instances of all classes declare their own `type`.
Furthermore, the values in the `type` slot must be the `class_uri` of the instantiated class. That, in turn, means that
all classes must now declare a `class_uri` and that the `type` slots must be associated with each class. This is
enforced with the following Python tests:

* test_all_classes_assert_a_class_uri.py
* test_all_classes_can_use_type_slot.py

> Note that classes should not re-associate themselves with any slot that they inherit form a superclass. For example, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that classes should not re-associate themselves with any slot that they inherit from a superclass. For example, the
```

Fix typo

> class definition for `Study`. This no-reasserting rule is tested with `test_inherited_slots_not_reiterated.py`

Reviewer 2: ```
For example, the class definition for `Study`.
```

I don't understand the role of this sentence fragment.

> Also note that the legacy v10 schema did include a `type` slot, but it was used very inconsistently. v10 also ahd a
> similar `designated_class` slot which ahs been retired.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also note that the legacy v10 schema did include a `type` slot, but it was used very inconsistently. v10 also had a
similar `designated_class` slot which has been retired.
```

Fix typos

The following slots were removed as a consequence of removing the `Reaction` class and beginning the process of
deprecating the `Pathway` class:

* `chemical`
* `direction`
* `has_part`
* `has_participants`
* `is_balanced`
* `is_diastereoselective`
* `is_fully_characterized`
* `is_stereo`
* `is_transport`
* `left_participants`
* `right_participants`
* `smarts_string`
* `stoichiometry`

`compound` and `has_solution_components` were removed as a consequence of removing the `Solution` class.

The string-typed `instrument_name` and `used` were removed due to refactoring around the new `Instrument` class and the
`instrument_used` slot, which is associated with numerous `PlannedProcess` subclasses.

> The following have been removed from the `Extraction` class. _more details required_

Author: Yes, and also possibly _Note that not all nmdc-schema contributors are in favor of those
semantics._ from the `CollectingBiosamplesFromSite` example

> The following have been removed from the `Extraction` class. _more details required_

Author: I can't remember who suggested or made those changes to `Extraction`

> The following have been removed from the `Extraction` class. _more details required_

Reviewer 3: I think it was Anastasiya.. but maybe @kheal can help? but can we merge and make an issue & separate PR?

> The following have been removed from the `Extraction` class. _more details required_

Reviewer 4: Not sure exactly what more details you want, but here's some context for why those slots were removed.

`extractant` was refactored and replaced with more general  `substances_used` slot`extraction_method` was replaced with more general `protocol_link` slot
`extraction_target` was changed to `extraction_targets` to enable multiple targets

> The following have been removed from the `Extraction` class. _more details required_

Author: https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/pull/2227/commits/8d86e633b00efaa45e619ee2f953726e02632d4d

> The following have been removed from the `Extraction` class. _more details required_

Author: https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/pull/2227/commits/b73af77af2aa9d8313956c0e7960c57557250d5f

* `extractant`
* `extraction_method`
* `extraction_target`

The string-typed `relevant_protocols` slot has been replaced with the `protocol_link` slot, which uses the `Protocol`
class as its range.

The string-typed `has_raw_value` has been replaced with `analyte_category`, which has an enumerated range. The following
are the **permissible values** for `analyte_category`:

* `metagenome`
* `metatranscriptome`
* `metaproteome`
* `metabolome`
* `lipidome`
* `nom`

In keeping with the focus on identification rather that quantification, `has_metabolite_quantifications` has been
replaced with `has_metabolite_identifications` and `metabolite_quantified` has been replaced with

> `metabolite_identified`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`metabolite_identified`.
```

End sentence with period (there were other instances of this above that I did not comment on).

`alternate_emails` and `keywords` were removed due to lack of use.

> The `part_of` slots has been replaced in many cases with more specific slots. For example, Biosample now has an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `part_of` slots have been replaced in many cases with more specific slots. For example, `Biosample` now has an
```

Fix typo and formatting

`associated_studies` relationship with `Study`.

The NMDC schema has always imported many slots from the MIxS standard, and has generally associated them with the

> `Biosmaple` class. In schema v11, several of those have been de-associated with Biosample as they aren't really

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Biosample` class. In schema v11, several of those have been de-associated with `Biosample` as they aren't really
```

Fix spelling and formatting

> attributes of Biosamples

Reviewer 2: I don't know whether you will want to format this as `Biosample`s, or `Biosample`, or biosamples. I don't understand the current format (i.e. capitalized, but not "back-ticked").

* `chimera_check`
* `nucl_acid_amp`
* `nucl_acid_ext`
* `pcr_cond`
* `pcr_primers`
* `pool_dna_extracts`
* `samp_vol_we_dna_ext`
* `seq_meth`
* `seq_quality_check`
* `target_gene`
* `target_subfragment`

> Some, but not all of those slots were re-associated with `Extraction`, `LibraryPreparation` or `NucleotideSequencing`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some, but not all, of those slots were re-associated with `Extraction`, `LibraryPreparation` or `NucleotideSequencing`
```

`MassSpectrometryConfiguration` instances can be reused to describe

* `mass_analyzers`
* `mass_spectrometry_acquisition_strategy`
* `mass_spectrum_collection_modes`
* `ionization_source`
* `polarity_mode`
* `resolution_categories`

These new slots are examplars of the increased emphasis on enumeration ranges (and the avoidance of the word 'type' in
slot names other than `type`)

- `analyte_category`
- `chemical_conversion_category`
- `chromatographic_category` _applicable to `ChromatographyConfiguration` and `ChromatographicSeparationProcess` ?_
- `data_category`
- `direct_infusion_category`
- `eluent_introduction_category`
- `feature_category`
- `protocol_execution_category`

The following new slots support the change from solution-based modeling to substance-based modelling:

* `substance_role`
* `substances_used`
* `substances_volume`
* `source_concentration`
* `final_concentration`
* `sample_state_information`

The `ChemicalEntity` class has been refactored for nmdc-schema v11, and is likely to undergo additional changes in later
2024 and 2025. For now, a `known_as` slot has been added to allow for flexibility in `PortionOfSubstance` and retain
precision in `ChemicalEntity`

> `extraction_targets` was added to `Extraction`, `sampled_portion` was added to `SubSamplingProcess` and
> `jgi_portal_analysis_project_identifiers`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`extraction_targets` was added to `Extraction`. `sampled_portion` was added to `SubSamplingProcess` and
`jgi_portal_analysis_project_identifiers`.
```
